So, we're going to talk about
microcontroller
characteristics right now.
The different characteristics
of microcontrollers.
Now, the reason why
this is important
for making IoT systems
is because when you
make it an IoT systems probably
one of the early
decisions about how to
implement the system
is going to be,
which microcontroller
should you use, right?
Now, there are a wide range
of choices with microcontrollers,
and you're going to have
to find one to use.
Now, a lot of these decisions
are pre-done for you, like,
if you work in a company,
they use a particular brand,
we use Freescale, whatever,
that's what you use, right?
Even within those
constraints, you get,
even be stuck with, say,
you're only using Freescale.
It's a ton of
microcontrollers you can use,
all with set of
different properties
and things like this.
You got to pick the one
that's right for
your project because
another feature of
IoT systems is that they are
generally constrained,
tightly constrained.
So, it's not like
a desktop laptop.
Right. If you look
at a desktop laptop,
those things are over engineered,
in the sense that you get
some quad core processors
run in it and I don't know,
three gigahertz
something like this.
Regular user doesn't use that.
In fact, it's running,
it's sort of two percent
capacity 99 percent of the time.
So, you start playing a game.
Certain games, they will
suck up that power,
they will use what
the computer has,
but vast majority of
the time that processor
is sitting there at
two percent basically idling
because you don't
need four cores,
you don't need that clock rate,
you don't need
everything that it has.
IoT based systems,
those things are cheap,
you want to be cheap.
You do not want to buy some big
powerful microcontroller
that you don't need.
You're always saving money
trying to say, "Look,
what is the cheapest
thing that just
barely does what I need to do?"
So, what you need is,
you need to have in mind a set of
characteristics that your
microcontroller needs,
so the bare minimum
for your system.
Then, you look through
the data sheets for
the microcontrollers to figure
out which one has that,
just barely, which is the
cheapest one that has that.
Now, a data sheet,
we're not going to look
at a data sheet because
those are painful look at.
A data sheet is basically
the sheet that has
all the information about
the particular microcontroller.
So, if you ever want to
look up a micro control,
you can look on
the top of the chip.
You can see the name of
the microcontroller,
its part number and
everything, you type that in,
into Google, and you say "data
sheet," and you will
come up with a data
sheet, most likely.
As data sheet, you
might look at one,
they are definitely
complicated to read.
They have lots of
different details
about the microcontroller.
There are certain
information in these,
certain things in these
we really need to
understand in order to
make reasonable decisions.
So, we don't have to
understand everything
in there, we will not.
Certain high level characteristics
of a microcontroller,
you should know what they mean,
and so when you look
at a data sheet,
say the front page
of the data sheet,
you can at least tell
superficially, "Yeah,
it has this, it has
that, has that.
That's what I need or I
don't need that." So on.
So, let's talk about
the basic characteristics
of microcontrollers that
you might look into.
Again, also another thing,
let me mention is
that, in this class,
you won't be making
this decision.
You're not going to
be deciding which
microcontroller
you're going to use.
In this course, we use
an Arduino, right?
Then, next set of course,
we can use Raspberry Pi,
we're set with that.
But I'm saying outside
of the course,
when you and design
your own IoT system,
you will need to pick
a microcontroller.
Okay. Datapath bitwidth.
Bitwidth, what that means is,
it's a number of bits
in each register.
A register storage element
to store as a number.
So, the bitwidth
basically tells you
the size of most
numbers in your system.
How many bits?
So, every number is
represented in binary as
a series of bits which are
binary digits,
either zero or one.
The more bits, the better, okay?
So, what do I mean by that?
If you have more bits,
64 bits let's say,
that means you can get more
accuracy than you could
with 16 bits,
something like that.
So, you get more accuracy,
you get more data throughput.
So, basically if you're
processing on 64-bit numbers,
there's more data
processing than you can
do then if you processing
on 8-bit numbers.
I know we're not going
to go into architecture,
but roughly that's what
datapath bitwidth means.
Now, there's a limit.
I mean you don't need
excessive accuracy
in your average system, right?
So, you know an 8-bit
microcontroller, like,
the Arduino that we're using,
is based on an 8-bit
microcontroller. That is sufficient.
That is minimal, but
that is sufficient
for the task that we do
in this class, right?
We don't need high accuracy.
We're just doing
simple control operations.
We don't need
accuracy and numbers.
So, it's a bitwidth
is something you have to
think about depending
on the task that you're
performing. Input/output pins.
Now, this is actually
an important thing
because it's often a bottleneck.
So, you got to your
microcontroller.
The microcontroller is
the center of the system.
It's connected to everything,
is orchestrating
the whole system, right?
So, the microcontroller
has to be connected to
all the different components
that you want to
put in your system.
Now, maybe not all but
to a lot of them, okay?
It requires pins to connect
it to these things.
So, maybe you need three pins
to connect to
one integrated circuit,
and five pins to connect another,
and so on depending on
what the circuit is,
you know, how many pins
it has on its interface.
You can easily chew
up all the pins,
you can easily use
up all the pins on
our microcontroller because
there are these microcontrollers,
generally, they don't
have too many pins.
So, you have to be careful
about how you use the pins.
So, that's why very early
in the design process,
you have to just sketch
out your design,
figure out what the different
components are you going to use,
and how many pins each one of
them needs to go talk
to the microcontroller.
So, you can get a number,
like say, okay, I need 40 pins.
Then you can find a data
sheet that reports it
has at least 40 pins
and so on, right?
So, input/output pins are
important for that reason.
Performance, okay. So,
performance is important.
It depends on
the application, right?
So, sometimes it's important,
sometimes it's not.
Now, one thing to note
with performances,
many times when you're
making an IoT device
it is interacting
with a human, right.
It's a device that's dealing with
the human and humans are slow.
So, humans, they don't need
you to respond too quickly.
Now, when I say not too quickly,
let's say you're putting
images on a screen.
These images on a screen,
if you put 30 a
second on a screen,
a human will be very
happy with that.
Human will see it, say mode,
and everything will
be smooth, right?
Now, 30 frames a second,
30 things a second,
operations second is very
little for many processes
and that depends
on the processor.
Maybe a processor could
do a lot more than that,
but it's not necessary
because the human is slow.
So, you're supposed to get
with this with sound, right?
With audio, a human can only
hear what 22 kilohertz,
I think, is a maximum0 frequency.
That is not very fast,
okay, 22,000 operations a second.
That's not a high rate of
processor speed, right?
So, a processor can
process audio data much
faster than a human can
hear the data, right?
So, you can use
a pretty slow processor and
still produce
a satisfactory audio.
So, performance is important.
You have to consider that
depends on your application.
Video though, video requires
a lot more even those
30 frames a second,
each frame might have
many millions of
pixels and you might have to do
lots of processing on that.
So, video generally
requires a higher rate,
but audio you know,
if you're just an
audio or tactile,
maybe if somebody's
pressing a button,
something like that, very slow
clock rate is sufficient.
There we go, okay. So, some
other features, timers.
There are other components inside
your microcontroller that are
commonly useful to an IoT
system like a timer.
Now, you need a timer
for any type of
real-time application
and a lot of
IoT systems have
real time functionality in them.
So, say you want
something to happen at
a certain deadline.
I want to sample this sound
every one thousandth of
a second I want to
sample the sound.
Then you need a timer to trigger
that event to happen
at that rate, right?
So, or I want to
sample a monitor,
I want to sample
some temperature monitor
at some regular period, right?
You need a timer to set that,
to force it to
happen at that rate.
So, timer is a really
important in microcontrollers.
So, you need a few timers.
When you considering the timers,
there's an accuracy, a
timer accuracy issue.
You got to think
how much accuracy do you need in
the timing and then
that determines
the bitwidth at
the timer, right?.
So, an 8-bit timer is less
accurate than the 16-bit timer.
We'll get to that later
when we deal with timers.
Anyway timers are components
that you look for,
you always want a few of
them in a microcontroller.
Analog to digital converters.
So, what this is for is
to read analog signals.
Now, the issue here is
that microcontrollers are
generally digital devices, okay.
When I say digital,
all the numbers
are zeros and one, off or on,
they're discrete values, zero
or one, nothing in between.
Now, analogue is
a continuous set of values.
So, the difference between
analog and digital is the same as
the difference between
real numbers and integers,
right? They're discrete integers.
You can have zero,one, two
but you can't have 1.5.
While analog is continuous,
you can have any number anywhere.
Now, controllers
microcontrollers in
integrated circuits
in general they
are almost always digital,
completely digital
because it's much
easier to design
a digital circuit
than it is to design
an analog circuit.
But they are digital,
but the world is analog.
So, what I mean by that?
Save this light that is in
my face while we're recording.
This light can be
a little brighter,
I hope is not a little brighter,
little brighter, a little dimmer.
Okay. It's not just off or on.
They can increase the brightness,
decrease it in an analog way.
So, phenomena that humans
interact with, sound, right.
I can talk a little louder.
I can talk a little
softer and so on.
So, that's an analog phenomenon.
So, the world is generally
analog to the
perceptions of a human.
These computers are digital.
So, if you want a an IoT device
to process these
analog phenomenon,
it has to convert it
into a digital number.
So, the brightness
of this light, say,
I want my IoT system to do
something when the brightness
reaches a certain threshold,
it's going to hesitate.
it needs to be able to take that
analog value of
that light brightness,
convert it to a digital number
that I can use in my code.
I can say if brightness
is greater than
1,000 or some digital
number, right?
So, analog to digital
converters are important
in an IoT devices
because you want it
generally is very common
to take analog phenomenon
and convert it to digital values
that you can process
in your code.
So, A to D converter
analog to digital,
A to D usually
want one or more of these
in a microcontroller.
I'll note right now
Raspberry Pi does not
actually have an analog
digital converter,
so that limits it
in certain ways,
but it is very calm
for microcontroller
to have at least one analog
to digital converter.
Low power modes. These
are common nowadays, too.
When I say nowadays,
I'm an old guy,
so I remember back
in the old days,
when nobody cared about power,
there's plenty of power.
That's because everything was,
things weren't battery powered,
everything was
plugged into a wall.
Also microcontrollers were
just much slower then,
so, they didn't
consume much power.
Nowadays, things
are battery driven,
things are fast, right?
The clock rate is fast
and the faster it runs,
the more power it uses.
So, power is a very
big issue these days,
when you're doing integrated
circuit design and system design.
So, in integrated circuits,
it is very common to
have low power modes,
in microcontrollers you can have
different low power modes.
So, the chip doesn't
have to be just
completely off or completely on,
it can have these
intermediate modes
where certain things
are turned on,
certain things that turned off,
or maybe something
that's turned on,
but it's running
at a slower rate,
you know things like this.
Maybe you can't use the memory,
but it doesn't lose what
it's storing, right?
So, it's got
this intermediate state.
So, there in low power modes
built into these
microcontrollers commonly,
and we're not going to
cover that in this class
because that's a
little more sophisticated
than we're going
to touch on this class,
but more advanced IoT systems.
Yeah, you're considering
low power modes.
You often these things often
run off a battery if you want
them to run a long time and
that's sucked down
the whole battery.
So, that you often
want them to run
in low power mode
when is possible.
So, you can see this
in a data sheet.
You can write in
the front page probably,
you'll say that it has
certain low power modes.
Communication protocol support.
So, what this is and we'll
get to this more later,
but these microcontrollers
they have
to communicate with
other integrated circuits.
Okay. These integrated circuits,
the way that they communicate,
they use some kind of
a communication protocol.
Relatively simple
communication protocol,
the way that they
send data to and
from each other
over a set of pins,
it's got to be in
a certain order with
a certain timing and so
on. That's the protocol.
We'll get into more detail
about these protocols later,
but some of them are UART,
I2C, SPI, those are some.
We'll cover those
later in the class,
but these are protocols
that you can look in
the data sheet and say,
yes it supports I2C,
yes supports SPI, yes
supports UART, right?
Now, this is important because
when you're making
your bigger system,
say you want your microcontroller
to talk to some sram,
sram chip, right?
This sram chip maybe it talks
I2C, but doesn't talk SPI.
If your microcontroller doesn't
support I2C, then
you have trouble.
Now generally, these
microcontrollers nowadays
they mostly support everything
and all those I just
said and others, too.
So generally, you have in
most basic microcontrollers,
you have a lot of
communication protocol support,
but you should check,
just in case. Thank you.